So welcome to another code walkthrough for C Programming for Everybody. This is another in our
epilogue code where we're comparing and contrasting the way I taught dictionaries, lists, and strings
in the Kernigan and Ritchie Chapter 6 with how Guido van Rossum actually implemented dictionaries,
lists, and strings, and we're going to look at dictionaries here. So I've got two tabs open in
my text editor. I've got one that's p1dict.c, which is the Python 1 implementation, which is my
approximation of Guido's approach, my simplification of Guido's approach, and then I have the krdict,
which is the version that I wrote, kind of cleaned up and adapted for this, the version that I wrote
as we covered it in Kernigan Ritchie Chapter 6, and if we look at the very allocation and, I mean,
the structures at the top, we have a D node, a dictionary node, and we have in the dictionary
node in my implementation is got a next pointer, and so it's got a key and a value. We're going to
character, we're going to string keys and integer values just to keep our mallocs down, but the
difference between the dictionary node in my code is that I am going to, every one is going to be
part of a linked list, because if you recall in my code in Kernigan and Ritchie, as it's described,
it is an array of linked lists, and so in this case I just have four heads and four tails that
point to the head of a linked list, and so that means that every D node has got to be either the
beginning, middle, or end of a linked list, and so it's got to have the D nodes have to have a star
next in them. So let's go compare and contrast that with how Guido did it. So Guido still has
a D node, because now we're in dictionaries, and so you need a key and a value, and so in my krdict
I made the value be integers just to simplify it, but I'm going to make the keys be, the values be
strings in my Python code to be a little closer to, you know, what Guido did. But then the change
happens when we start allocating the actual dictionary object itself. So if we look at what
I allocated, I have a number of buckets and I have a count for my struct krdict, but then I have an
array of four heads, an array of four tails, which is basically a way to make four linked lists that
I will select among the linked lists based on the hash function, but that's not what
Guido did. In p1 dict we got an allocation and a length, but then we also just have an array,
seriously, an array of pointers to D nodes that we'll call items. Now the fun thing is,
if you look at this, let me go ahead and show you this a little bit different. If I look at the p1
list and I compare and contrast, a p1 list has an allocation, a length, and a pointer to an array of
pointers to strings. In my p1 dictionary it's an array of pointers to key value pairs, but the
alloc length and then an array of pointers to something is a very similar approach, and you'll
see when we get to the Python 3 stuff that there's almost a duality in Guido's mind between the
dictionary and the list. The dictionary is like just a slightly improved list having to do with
indexing, and again it was a surprise to me. But the similarity, again, when we get to Python,
the 3 Python, Python 3.7 version of the dictionary is going to be like, oh, I see what here going on
there, but so just for now remember the approximate duality between dictionaries and lists in Python
1.0. Okay, so again we have our linked list nodes that have a pointer to a key, pointer to a value,
that'll be a dynamically allocated pointer, a pointer to a dynamically allocated and saved string,
and then we have a dictionary which is then a one-dimensional array of those pointers to those D
nodes. And if we look, so the key thing here is we need to know which entries in this array of D
nodes are empty and available and which ones are used. So the constructor is a little more complex.
If we look at p1 dict_new, of course we allocate the kind of object itself. We set the length
because there's nothing in it, and we're going to allocate two slots just like we did in the p1 list.
That forces us to reallocate so that we don't have to write too big of a code to cause reallocation,
and we can debug our reallocation. And then we basically create an array of D nodes,
right? So we're like two times the size of struct D node, and the size of struct D node is
two 64-bit pointers. And then what we're going to do is we're going to mark them as empty. We need
to know that these items are empty, and so we're going to set the key, which is a pointer, in the
value for each of them to null. So you've created a two long array of D nodes with keys and values of
null. And again, we need to remember which ones are empty and are not. And so then let's look at
the main code. So that's the constructor. That's the data structures and the constructor.
So what we're going to do is... Oh, man, I thought I deleted that line.
Yeah, let's delete this line because we're printing it. We've added some stuff in the print.
That makes it a little simpler. Okay, let's hope it still runs. That would be cool.
Let's run it. Let's keep, like, change the code.
Yay, it works. Okay. Okay, it's simpler. I like simple. So we create a dictionary
calling P1 dict new. We print it. It's going to be empty. Then we put under the key of Z,
the string catchphrase, and print it. Then we put the key of... We put W in. That should be a
replacement. And then we put the string Sakai in. Sakai equals B, basically. Sally equals C,
basically. And then A equals D. And then we say, how many things do we have in there? And then
we do a get, like a .get in a Python dictionary. We're looking for the key Z, and we're looking
for the key X. Well, key X isn't going to be in there. And then we delete it. So let's go ahead
and run this code, which we just did. And so what this print does, I've added some stuff to it. So
you see the first print is just curly break, open and close, curly brace, empty. And it's also
printing out the length and alloc. And so basically what it's saying is there is a length of zero,
and we have two spaces alloc. So then what we do is we put Z in, and that Z equals catchphrase,
and that ends up in position zero in the array. And then we have a length of one, because we've
got one thing in there, an alloc of two. Then if you recall, we replace Z equals W. Now because Z
hashes to the same spot, and we'll talk about how that happens in a second, that hashes to position
zero in the array. And then it just replaces it. And so it just replaced the value in that case.
And so we still have only one item in there and an allocation of two. Okay. And so then what we're
doing is we're inserting a new, like sacai equals B. I should probably put some more print statements
in there. Let's do that. Let's do the underscore put, and let's put a print statement in here.
Printf insert percent s equals percent s backslash n comma key comma value.
Oops. It'll be just easier for us to debug this.
Okay. Okay. So we insert Z equals catchphrase. That goes in hashed slot zero. We have one item
and a length of two. We insert Z equals... No, I want to call that put. I want to call that put,
because it's not insert. So then we put Z equals W, and then it uses the hashing and the lookup
and all that stuff to find that that's in position zero. And so we simply replace the value. So we
didn't extend it at all. And now it's trying to put sacai equals B in there. And with the hashing,
hashing of sacai finds its way to position one in our two item array. And when we're done,
we've got our two item array. Happens to be insert order, but that doesn't necessarily mean,
because it's just my hash function is terrible. And then we have two items in and two items out,
two items in there and two items allocated. Now we're trying to insert sally equals C.
And now the hashing algorithm, which I'll show you in a bit, looks through and says,
wait a sec, there's no space here. Usually that hashing algorithm says, if it's above 60%
full, then we declare it no space. And so we're going to do what's called rehashing.
So we reallocate and then we re-add the things. So we're making the space so it doubles it in
size. So when it's all said and done, sacai ends up in position one and Z ends up in position two,
and sally ends up in position three. And we have three items in any four long array.
Now here's an interesting thing. You will see here when we go through the rehashing,
Z in the two long array, Z was in position zero, but in the four long array, Z is in position two,
because this is rehashing. Now what happens is that's because whatever the hash value for Z was,
modulo two is zero, but modulo four is two. And so the positions don't change. It wasn't
going to end up in position one, but modulo two and modulo four are multiples of each other.
But you'll see in this case here, sacai, Z, sally, the position of Z moved. And so again,
if you're writing an iterator that's going through this and you just inserted one and it reallocated
in that, that's why Python one dictionaries and literally any hash-based dictionary that's truly
using hash, we'll see how it worked in Python three in a second. But when we reallocate things,
stuff gets shuffled around. So the order is different. So we made space for sally and then
we put A equals D in. Now the thing we're triggering is if it's greater than 60% full,
when you have one and you got two, that's 50% full. And that's why the sacai equals B did not
trigger reallocation. But if we have three items in four slots, that's above 60%. And so we're
going to reallocate. So even though we could have snuck it in that last spot, that's not good for
hashing. So we're going to say, you know what, it's time to make this bigger again. So A equals D,
we're going to make space for A and then we're going to double the size of the array to be eight.
And let's see, we got sacai equals B in position one. We got Z equals W in position two. We got
sally equals C in position three and A equals D in position four. And we're half full at this point.
So we're done now. We have a length of four and we say, hey, let's look up Z and yes,
we get W and let's look up X. And the answer is there is no X. And so our code is working doing,
you know, our little unit test, our little unit test is kind of doing dictionary things. So
let's take a look at put, okay. Let's take a look at print because print's easier.
Let's take a look at print because print teaches us a little bit about the data structure. Okay,
so I'll come back, come back, come back. So in P one dict underscore print,
the whole little first equals one, that's just there so that we put the comma out. But
the nice thing is it's a for loop for I equals zero, I less than self alloc. Now,
if we look at the P one list, let's go look at P one list. The P one list,
it's I equals zero, I less than self length. And that's because in the list we just append
in the beginning of the array, sub zero, sub one, sub two, sub three. That's how lists work.
But because we're using hashing, our array is like sparse in that it starts out empty and we
start using slots, but we don't use every slot in order. So we've got to go through all the slots to
iterate through a dictionary array. And if it's null, remember if self items sub i.key equal equal
null continue, which means skip empty slots, skip empty slots. So this array could have 100 things
in it. And if we only put one, where the thing is inserted, which we're going to see in a second with
insert, is dependent on the hash function because we're not just inserting them linearly, we're
inserting them based on hash function using open hashing. And so we have to skip the empty items,
but after that it's okay. We just print them. And so we're iterating through this array of pointers,
skipping empty entries, and printing out the entries that exist every time we're doing an
underscore print. And so we're seeing them in the order that they got spread out using the hashing
function. And so you can see that it prints the key and it prints the value and then it prints the i,
the position. And so that leads to very, very pretty stuff. And then we print the length and
the alloc. And so this is great for debugging. Great for debugging for us. So that kind of reviews
that the items is a sparse array with nulls being our way of marking emptiness. Okay. So, and again,
if you go back to the underscore new, we allocated it and we set everything to null. Okay. So let's
go look at the underscore put, because that's where all the good stuff happens. It's a bit of work.
Can I get it all on one screen? No, I can't get it all on one screen. Okay.
So we'll just work through it. So the first thing we have to do is we have to figure out
which of the slots in this array the key belongs in. Which of the slots
in the array does the key belong in? So we're going to use a utility thing we write,
we wrote called P1 dict underscore find to say, find me the entry in the array
that is the right entry for this particular key. Okay. So now I've got to go look at that.
P1 dict find. Okay. So this is pretty straightforward. And so this is open hashing.
And so the way open hashing works is it starts by doing a hash computation to figure out a position
in this array of items. And get bucket, you've seen this in other code that I wrote, get bucket
is just a crappy little hash function that does a shift and an exclusive or repeatedly going through
the entire string with the idea of creating a pseudo random number that is deterministic based
on the string that I can then take the modulo of the number of buckets. So this ends up with a
relatively large integer that in long strings might even overflow. And again, hashing computing hash
functions is a research area unto itself. This is a terrible hashing function, but I've used it over
and over and over again because it's short and gives me some random, some pseudo randomness,
but it's probably a highly collision resistant. So the whole idea is if I have two buckets,
this gives me a deterministic number between zero and two, but not including two. Okay.
So let's go back to the find operation. So we get the bucket and that bucket might be,
let's say it's bigger, let's say we've got 16 slots and they're all empty.
The way it works is bucket will say, okay, you're hopefully your slot five.
The problem is, then there's what's called collision resolution. And if slot five is
already filled, you've got to find another slot. But you got to find another slot in a way that
later after it's in there, you can find it again, find the key again.
And so we do linear hashing. We do linear collision resolution,
which means if we find ourselves hashing to position five and position five is full,
we say, oh, well, let's just linearly go forward. Let's look at six, let's look at seven,
then eight, nine, whatever. And then when we get to the end, we go zero, one, two, three, four, five.
And if we get to the point where we have checked all the slots and they're all full,
then we kind of have to blow up. And that's where it says printf could not find slot for key.
That would be like throwing an exception. We'll just print it out here. But that'd be like,
something went wrong because you're never supposed to 100% allocate a hash. About 60 or 70% is when
you're supposed to quit and double it or extend it in some other way. So let's look at the code
that hunts for a starting at position five hunts for a free position. And so we say offset equals
zero offset less than self-alloc offset plus plus. So that's going to go, if we have like eight
entries, that's going to go from zero to seven. But we really want to start that iterator in five
and then wrap around when we get to eight. Okay. And so I just, I call it offset, but then I calculate
the position in the, in the array as offset plus the number of buckets. I mean, offset plus the
bucket, which is five and then modulo self-alloc. So if we got eight, offset's going to go from zero
through seven. And if offset and a bucket is five, that's going to go from five through seven and
then zero through four. Okay. So I is the circular look. So we're, we're doing a circular lookup in
an array starting at five. We're going to look through every, if necessary, every single position
in that array is going to be checked. So we're starting at like five where the hash function
told us to go. And if self items sub five dot key is null, it's a great spot. That means that the
hash function pointed us to a available entry and we're done. So we return the address ampersand
self arrow items sub I. Otherwise we might have found something that's full and we don't know
right now if we're going to replace this value or not, but if the key matches what we're looking for,
we actually found the right one. And so we returned self, the address of self items I, and if we
didn't find an empty one and, and we didn't find one that was full with a matching key,
then what we've got to do is go back up into the for loop and go down one. So if we were at five
and we, it was full, but the key didn't match, then we would go to six. And if six was full and
the key didn't match, we'd go to seven. If seven was empty, then we're done. So we say, oh, seven
is where we're going to go. And so you can see if you think about this for a little while, and you
can go read the, the lecture slide on open hashing. You can see that as long as there's space in this
array and it's not completely full, eventually we're going to find a place. Okay. We're either
going to find a place that matches the key or we're going to find an empty place. And that's what
finds job is to do. And again, as long as resize is working and we never let it get to be above 70%,
we can always find a slot for the key. Okay. So this, again, when we say printf could not find
slot for key, that's really trace back time. Cause that means that the thing above us, which we're
going to look at now is going to be going to blow up. Okay. So let's look at underscore put again.
So comma underscore put. So a lot of work it's done in underscore find where we hash the key
and then we do the linear, we do the linear lookup. If it, we do the linear lookup
for collision resolution and we either have an empty entry or we have the actual entry.
And so the first if statement we have afterwards is if old is not null and the key is not null,
that means we just found it, which means all we got to do is replace the value. We don't have to
add any entries. The index is great. The array is great. So we just free the old value and we
alloc the new value. And then we just string copy it in and away we go. So that's, that's when we did
the, that's when we did the Z equals W. That was the code that ran to basically say, oh, well we
found Z. So we just have to, we have to free the original string and the original string is catch
phrase and the second string is W. So we're replacing catch phrase with W and this little
bit of code right after the underscore find is the thing that does, here we found it. Okay.
But so that's, that's the second one. Let's go back to Z equals catch phrase because Z equals
catch phrase is not found because we're starting with an empty array. So that means that old key,
we're going to get an old because the hash will find a slot and that slot will be empty and it'll
give us back to us. But old key is going to be null, which means this one is available, which is cool.
Okay. Now actually this to do is not a to do anymore. Right now it's going to be an ignore.
So this is the bit. Okay. I'll come back to this. Okay. This is the tricky bit.
Now I never did this in Kernigan and Ritchie. I don't think I have to check,
but this is called rehashing and this is when our length is greater than or equal to 70%
of our allocation, which means this array is more than 70% full. That's when we're going to do this
reallocation. Okay. But I'm going to ignore that whole if statement for now. I'll come back. So
we're processing Z equals catchphrase here and Z ends up, we can even look, ends up in sub zero
of the array. And so if it's time to insert, this part is really easy. So it's time to insert.
We're going to allocate the key, the value, malloc the value and malloc the key and string copy them
in. The old already exists. Old is a pointer into an entry, into an array that's got a key and a
value. Okay. So there's an array of key value pairs. And so we don't have to allocate the old
itself because the old is already in the array, but we do have to allocate the strings that we've
been passed as parameters. And then we add one to the length. And so that's basically how it ran
when we're doing Z equals catchphrase. At the end, we had Z in position zero. We had a length of one
and an alloc of two. Okay. So now we're going to look at where we've got, and you'll notice in my
0.7, let's go back to that now because we're going to look at that. This is kind of tricky.
Okay. So this whole self length greater than or equal to alloc 0.7, it allowed me, because it was
only two items, it allowed me to fill it up completely because one item is only 0.5. And so
when I put Sakai equals B in, I didn't trigger the reallocation. So it just put it in position one.
I don't know if, oh, Sakai did go into position one. So, but now we're doing C and it's like,
I could not find a slot for key Sally. And so that means could not find slot for key Sally.
So that means that it searched, let's go back to find, I guess this is not really a trace back.
This is just a fact. So it went and looked at hash, what's the key on that again? Sally,
that key is Sally. It hashed the Sally, found a starting point with bucket. That hash just found
a bucket. And where did Sally want to go? Sally ends up well in three, but it probably would have
been a one. Sally would have been bucket one before it got expanded. And then it looked through the
whole thing, which in this case was only two. And it couldn't find either an empty one or one that
matched Sally. And so we say, can't find it, return null. Okay. And so now we get back to put.
So we're doing Sally now and we find old is actually null. So this code doesn't run.
So we didn't find an entry. Old key is not even allowed. We're not even allowed to say old arrow
key because old is null. And now find, didn't find it, which could be bad, but we're going to fix it.
Come back, come back. We're going to fix it. So we're coming through here and we're saying,
if self length is too full, greater than 70% full, then we're going to make space. So you can see here
in the output, it says we are making space for Sally. We're still in the middle of the put of
Sally equals C, right? And so we're going to grab a copy of the old allocation number and the old
items. Those are just integers. And then what we're going to do is we're going to make a brand new
empty items. And so we are going to double the size of our array. And then we're going to
set the new items. That's why I had to store old items here. We're going to set the new items to be
four D nodes. It's an array of four D nodes. Now we've got to be really careful. This is
kind of like a constructor for that items. We're going to set the key and the value of the newly
allocated four items in that array to null because they start empty. You'll see in a sec
that we got to re-add them. So we're kind of creating an empty array that's twice as big.
And now what we got to do, and this is why we call this rehashing, is we got to go through the old
array and find all those items. And then we got to add them in the right spot. And this is where
you'll notice that z was in position zero and z ends up in the reallocated rehashed array in position
two. So you really have to rehash it because all the rules in the new one have to be followed. The
initial hash, the linear resolution of conflicts, of collisions, etc. So you really think of this
items as a brand new one. And we've got the old items sitting there, not much longer, but we're
going to go through them all and we're going to just add them again. Okay. So we're going through
all of the old items. If the key is null, that's one of the empty slots in old items. Continue.
Then we're going to call find again. And the key thing there is that's why we made self items be
the new thing is so we could call find. So that's the first time it's being called in this loop.
The new items is completely empty, but old items and i sub key is the key. And then,
and so let's see what we got here.
Yeah. So new item, if new item is null, that means it didn't find space. Now we just doubled the
space. So that shouldn't happen. And given that the keys in old items are already unique, because
this is a dictionary, we should never find in the new empty the key twice. So that basically,
that basically says, oh, it's already in there. And the answer is, wait, wait, wait, we started
with an empty one. So new item key not equals null is a bad thing, but it should never happen
because we're going, we have a unique, each key is unique. There are no duplicates. And so as we're
inserting them again into a new hash map array, that we should never get it. So that's why it says
very bad news. That means that we either couldn't find space because I don't know why, or it's
already in there, which I don't know why either. That means that this is like traceback time. This
is like the runtime library is not well formed and we made a bug in our runtime library. So then
that means that new item should be non-null and it should be empty, which means we can just like
copy. Now this is just a pointer copy. It's not actually the stuff because we're taking the key
is the pointer to the key, the string array and the value is the pointer to the string array. So
we say new item key equals old item sub i.key and the same thing for value. And so now what we've
done is we've copied all of the old items and we've positioned them correctly in the new items.
So at this point, we're done. And the free here is simpler because we're not freeing the strings
because we just copied those. We are freeing the array. Okay, so we're freeing the old array.
Free old underscore items frees the old array.
Now what we need to do is we need to search for the position because we're going back to
put sally equal c. And so sally is the key that we're putting in. So we just made space for sally.
Now again, if sally was already in there, this code would run and we'd be done. And so we have
to re-look in the new, the newly expanded array. We got to find the right spot. And again, if sally
was already in there, this code would have been run and we'd never be down here. So we have to
redo this and say, okay, where is sally? In this case, we really, where should sally be long? Because
we just made more space. And so old equals null would mean we don't have, we still don't have
space for sally, even though we doubled the darn thing or yeah, we doubled it. And old key not
equal. No, that means that sally's already in there. Oh, wait a second. If sally was in there,
we'd not even come down here. So again, the selling old key not equal. Again, you put out these kind
of trace-backy very, very bad news. That is like somebody, our code, our code, we're the library
writer, our code is messing up. So old is, is really supposed to find no matter what, we're adding
sally to the dictionary, old got to find a slot for us, or we just, or our code is broken. So this
is me debugging and leaving this in, you know, just to make sure like, oh man, that is impossible,
should never happen. But I'm going to say very bad news. So it finds a slot and then we just
copy the key and the value and increment the length. And so this whole realloc thing is kind
of new. I don't think I did this when I did the Kernigan and Ritchie, because the way Kernigan
and Ritchie does it, you can just keep extending those linked lists. Like if you look, so if we
look at the underscore put in the Kernigan and Ritchie code, you'll see I do a get bucket, right?
And I find the bucket. And if I, if it matches, there's always a bucket in this one, because it's
the buckets are pointers to link lists. So there's always a bucket. There's no resolution by linear
collision resolution. So old is, oh, if we find it, we just copy the value and this I had integer
values. And then otherwise you just append to the end of the tail of the bucket using, you know,
self head sub bucket equals all new. And then it's just, at that point, this is just semantic and P
in the KR dict. We don't have to reallocate. Now you would want to reallocate at some point because
then these chains get too long. And that's, and so it's not like you don't have to reallocate with
these chains. I didn't write it. So the reallocation would be sort of in the middle of put and it'd be
very complex code. And it would be actually probably be about the same complexity, maybe a
little bit more complex than what the Python one implementation was. And so with that, I think I
pretty much have covered the essential differences between the Kernigan and Ritchie dictionary code
that I wrote and the basic approach, you know, the basic approach using an array of D node items.
And if we look at find a linear collision resolution and the linear collision resolution,
let's do this. I'll put a comment in here. Linear and underscore find.
Uh, I can't, um, I gotta figure out how to spell collision.
Well, the version you see will have, uh, how many S's? No, how many L's?
Okay. I'll fix that for you. And so this linear collision resolution and that that's tricky stuff.
And so you want to take a look at that and understand that, uh, very carefully. So I hope
that you found, uh, this lecture useful. I think the next thing we're going to talk about is
how dictionaries changed from Python one through 3.6 all the way up through Python three seven,
because the dictionaries did change and got a lot better. So we'll talk about that soon. Cheers.